@settitle chaos Protocols
@node Top
@top Protocols

$Id$


@menu
* Introduction::
* Basics::
* VFS::
* Keyboard::
* Console::
* Graphics::
@end menu


@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

This file tries to document all the standard protocols used in a chaos system. Since
chaos evolves very quickly, it might at times be a little outdated. If you feel like there is so,
please notify us. Also, much information will be unfinished, but we'll try to always keep this
documention up to date, since developers of servers for chaos need the information contained
in this document to write servers.


@node Basics
@chapter Basics

All communications between processes are done by sending blocks of dwords
containing the data via the kernel-functions for sending and receiving
messages. The first dword in a command block is always a signed dword
containing the command ID. If the protocol being used acknowledges the command
it should do this by placing the command ID in the first dword of the returned
message, or a negative value if there was an error. This is refered to as
"Standard return" in this file. All string in the command block are padded out
with zeroes to the next integral multiple of 4.


@node VFS
@chapter VFS

All programs and servers in chaos accesses the filesystem hierarchy by
communicating with the VFS-server. This is done by a few simple protocols:

@table @strong
@item Purpose
@emph{Get detailed information about an entry in the hierarchy.}

@item Call
@table @strong
@item 0
@emph{VFS_GET_ENTRY}
@item 1..n
@emph{Path string (length dword padded)}
@item n+1
@emph{Entry number}
@end table

@item Return
@table @strong
@item 0
@emph{Standard return}
@item 1
@emph{Length of filename in bytes}
@item 2..n
@emph{Filename string}
@item n+1
@emph{Filesize in bytes}
@item n+2
@emph{Type}
@end table
@end table


@node Keyboard
@chapter Keyboard

If a program in chaos wants to take input from the keyboard, it sends a message
to the keyboard server registering itself as a receiver of keypresses.


@node Console
@chapter Console

If a program (non-tornado-native) wants to output anything, it first needs to request
a virtual screen from the console-server. There is a few standard protocols for this:

@table @strong
@item CONSOLE_SCREEN_OPEN - Open a new screen with a specified mode

@item Call
@table @strong
@item dword 0
@emph{CONSOLE_SCREEN_OPEN}
@item dword 1
@emph{Mode (0 = text / 1 = graphic)}
@item dword 2
@emph{Width of screen (characters / pixels)}
@item dword 3
@emph{Height of screen (characters / pixels}
@item dword 4
@emph{BPP (bits per pixel)}
@end table

@item Return
@table @strong
@item dword 0
@emph{Standard return}
@item dword 1
@emph{Linear pointer where program is allowed to map screen buffer}
@item dword 2
@emph{Physical pointer to screen buffer}
@end table

@end table


@table @strong
@item CONSOLE_CHANGE - Change active console

@item Call
@table @strong
@item dword 0
@emph{CONSOLE_CHANGE}
@item dword 1
@emph{Pid owning console to change to}
@end table

@item Return
@table @strong
@item dword 0
@emph{Standard return}
@end table

@end table


@node Graphics
@chapter Graphics

Although you'll have a server for each graphic-card, the will all use the same
standard protocol to communicate. Constants are defined in graphics.h in the
chaos-standard-headers package.

@table @strong
@item GRAPHICS_MODE_CHANGE - Change current videmode

@item Call
@table @strong
@item dword 0
@emph{GRAPHICS_MODE_CHANGE}
@item dword 1
@emph{Type of mode (0 = text / 1 = graphic) (textmode may not be supported on all cards / platforms)}
@item dword 2
@emph{Width of screen (characters / pixels)}
@item dword 3
@emph{Height of screen (characters / pixels)}
@item dword 4
@emph{BPP (bits per pixel)}
@end table

@item Return
@table @strong
@item dword 0
@emph{Standard return}
@item dword 1
@emph{Physical pointer to framebuffer}
@end table

@end table
