@settitle The chaos Architecture
@node Top
@top The chaos Architecture

The chaos Architecture

$Id$

Copyright 1999 chaos development

@menu
* Prologue::
* The Microkernel::
* Overview of the Server Architecture::
* Client-Server Communication::
@end menu

@node Prologue
@chapter Prologue

In this document, we (chaos development) describe how the chaos system will
work. All of this is not written yet, but most of the kernel is finished and
we're starting slowly to write some basic servers. If you feel you want to
help, please contact us. You will find contact information at our website,
@url{http://www.chaosdev.org/}.

@node The Microkernel
@chapter The Microkernel

chaos is a microkernelbased operating system. This means that as much as
possible has been removed from the kernel. This design has several advantages
to traditional monolithic systems (like Linux and *BSD). The most important
(in our opinion, of course) is that it is easier to separate drivers from each
other. If, for example, you suddenly feel like you need IPv6 support, support
for this protocol can easily be added without the need of rebooting or even
recompiling anything. Our opinion is that only programmers should need to have
a compiler installed.

Our microkernel, called @emph{storm}, contains only the following::

@table @samp
@item IRQ management
@item Exception handling
@item Task switching (commonly called multitasking, but that is not true in non-SMP systems)
@item Process startup and stopping
@item Thread support
@item Advanced scheduler with support for priorities and threads
@item DMA support (this is not written yet, please contact us if you want to volunteer)
@item Interprocess communication (IPC)
@item Memory and I/O-port protection
@item Paging (virtual memory)
@end table

As you can see, there are no hardware drivers, no networking, no graphics
code; hardly anything. This makes the kernel extremely small (~15K for the
moment, in compressed format), but still features the things necessary to
load other modules.

@node Overview of the Server Architecture
@chapter Overview of the Server Architecture

A @dfn{server} in chaos terminology is what most other operating systems refer
to as a @dfn{driver} or a @dfn{module}. The reason we call it @dfn{server} is
simply because this is what it is; it is not just a bunch of code. The
difference from most other systems is that a server isn't any more privileged
than a regular user process (well, actually, it is, but it's not at all as
privileged as the kernel, even though administratory rights are required to
start a server). This means that a server cannot just read and write from the
memory and/or I/O ports it wants as in traditional, older systems. In chaos,
you have to first @dfn{register} the I/O port(s) and/or IRQ(s) you want the
server to use, and @emph{then} you will be able to use it/them,
@emph{if, and only if} the I/O port(s) and/or IRQ(s) was not used by a
previously started server. This, in combination with the memory protection
mechanisms chaos uses to separate all processes, makes it virtually impossible
for a server to bring the computer down. This makes a chaos system stable and
robust. And what's best of it all: it doesn't make the system noticeably
slower than a regular, non-protected system!

Technically speaking, this is accomplished by running all kernel code
(syscalls and bootup initialization) in privilige level (PL) zero, servers and
regular user processes in PL 3. This makes it impossible for an ordinary user
process to access the hardware, and still allows the servers to use the
port(s) and stuff it needs if it was able to allocate it. Several syscalls
that are not available for ordinary user processes are available for the
servers. The kernel separates servers from other processes by having an
internal flag for every process indicating the process' type.

@node Client-Server Communication
@chapter Client-Server Communication

All communication between servers and regular processes (referred to as
@dfn{clients} in this chapter) is done by means of the
syscall_message_send () and syscall_message_receive () system calls. The format
of the data is highly standardized and follows these simple rules:

Structure for IPC

@table @samp
@item 1 dword
Command ID. This is the command ID, and is specific for each server. This is
used by the server to decode the data passed.
@item 1 dword
Length of data in @emph{this} block. It should be noted that in one message,
multiple command blocks can be put together in a single packet. This ensures
high performance, since you do not have to do a system call for each
operation. The server may then split the operations contained in one message
and schedule the operations between processes in a fair way to prevent long
wait-times for processes.
@item data
This is individual for each command ID the server takes and it's length is
specified by the previous dword.
@item ...
Repeats until the length of the packet is reached.
@end table
