@settitle The chaos Programming Reference Manual
@node Top
@top The chaos Programming Reference Manual

$Id$

Copyright 1999 chaos development. This document can be used under the
terms of the GPL, version 2 or (at your option) any later version. But
please, please use a different name in derivative works.

Version 0.0.1. Please note that this is work in progress; don't treat
this as a finished manual, for it is not.

@menu
* Introduction::                     What's all this about?
* Chapter 1::                        The Kernel API
* Chapter 2::                        The chaos Libraries
* Chapter 3::                        Error numbers
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter What's all this about?

This is The chaos Programming Reference Manual. It describes how the
Kernel API and the chaos Libraries (will) work. It is not a programming
tutorial, but it will probably be pretty helpful for those of you who
have been programming for other systems earlier. Since chaos is pretty
different to what most of you likely are used to, we will focus on the
differences; hence, knowledge of programming for (for example) Linux or
other Unix systems will be desirable (but not required).

This reference is split up into two parts: first, the kernel; then, the
user libraries. The kernel interface shouldn't be used by most programs,
but we felt like documenting it anyway, so that we won't forget how it
works. The user libraries are very unfinished yet (only the console
library has been written, actually). Please don't be afraid to help us
if you like to.

@node Chapter 1
@chapter The Kernel API

First, a very important thing to note. Our inline function in
system/system_calls.h all push their input variables onto the
stack. Thus, if you use local variables and pass them into the system
calls, you must @emph{not} use -fomit-frame-pointer. It @emph{will}
generate invalid code. Trust me on this; we spent quite some time on
debugging this...

The Kernel API consists of the following functions:

@deffn Function dword syscall_read_timer (void)
Reads the number of ticks since the system last was rebooted. The number
of clock ticks... can not be determined right now. Wait for the
kernelfs. But OTOH, this system call will probably be removed and
replaced by an entry there...
@end deffn

@deffn Function void syscall_log (char *s)
Prints a message to the logging facilities. Currently, it just prints it
to the screen (prepending the server name and appending a newline), but
a log server will be written shortly which will make this obsolete.
@end deffn

@deffn Function dword syscall_register_irq (dword irq, void (*b)(void))
Register an IRQ handler for the given IRQ. This can only be done by a
server.  It will enable the interrupt in the interrupt controller, and
set up the interrupt as a separate task (it's like a hybrid-thread which
never gets scheduled).
@end deffn

@deffn Function dword syscall_register_port (dword base, dword num)
Registers a port range for usage by the server (not available to regular
programs). Please note that by default, no port access is allowed, so if
a server needs to probe a region, it must firt allocate it (and perhaps
later deallocate it if neccessary)
@end deffn

@deffn Function dword syscall_mmap (pid_type pid, dword linear_page, dword physical_page, dword pages)
This maps the physical pages specified at the linear page address given
for the given pid. Right now, no security checks are done @emph{at all},
so please be careful when using this call. This will be fixed as soon as
we think it's neccessary.
@end deffn

@deffn Function thread_type syscall_thread (void)
This creates a new thread for the current process. The returned value is
the number of the thread in the old thread, and zero in the new thread.
@end deffn

@deffn Function error_type syscall_process_control (pid_type pid, dword class, dword parameter)
This changes the state of a process. The classes are defined in
process.h, and are as follows:
@end deffn

@deffn Class PROCESS_TERMINATE
Tells the kernel to kill the process unconditionally.
@end deffn

@deffn Class PROCESS_SUSPEND
Suspend a process until resumed by PROCESS_RESUME.
@end deffn

@deffn Class PROCESS_RESUME
Resumes a process suspended with PROCESS_SUSPEND.
@end deffn

@deffn Class PROCESS_SLEEP
Puts a process to sleep for a user specified amount of time.
@end deffn

@deffn Function error_type syscall_set_name (char *name)
Sets the process name. This is used as a primitive form of name-space in
conjunction with the next function.
@end deffn

@deffn Function pid_type syscall_get_pid_by_name (char *name)
Returns the pid number of the process with the given name.
@end deffn

@node Chapter 2
@chapter The chaos Libraries

@menu
* Section 2.1::                         Why not just POSIX?
* Section 2.1.5::                       About return values
* Section 2.2::                         The file library (library_file)
* Section 2.3::                         The tornado library (library_tornado)
* Section 2.4::                         The graphics library (library_graphics)
* Section 2.5::                         The console I/O library (library_console)
* Section 2.6::                         The network library (library_network)
* Section 2.7::                         The memory library (library_memory)
* Appendix A::                          ACL (Access Control Limits)
@end menu

@node Section 2.1
@section Why not just POSIX?

First, POSIX is not freely available. Thus, supporting it without paying
money gets difficult. Second, POSIX doesn't really fit into the chaos
philosophy. We don't like abbreviations, for example. Therefore, we decided
to go our own way. However, to make porting of foreign programs easy in
the beginning, we will also port a regular C library (probably glibc). It
is to be clearly marked that using this library for new programs is strongly
discouraged. Only use it if your program must be portable.

@node Section 2.1.5
@section About return values.

In the chaos libraries, we @emph{always} use return_type for functions,
except in the cases where the function can not fail. (Very seldom, but
'random' is such an example. It is not dependant on any external factors)

We do not use the errno approach at all, since it is very poor.

@node Section 2.2
@section The file library (library_file)

@deffn Function file_handle_type file_open (u8 *@var{file})
Opens the given file name and associates it with a file handle (which is used
when communicating to the VFS server). If the file does not exist, an error
will be returned.
@end deffn

@deffn Function error_type file_close (file_handle_type @var{file})
Closes the given file handle.
@end deffn

@deffn Function error_type file_write (file_handle_type @var{file}, void *@var{data}, dword @var{size})
Writes @var{size} bytes of the data block located at @var{data} to the file
handle associated with @var{file}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function error_type file_read (file_handle_type @var{file}, void *@var{data}, dword @var{size})
Reads up to @var{size} bytes to @var{data} from the file handle associated with
@var{file}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function error_type file_create (u8 *@var{name})
Creates a file with @var{name} as its full name (including path). Per default,
the file will be unaccessible by everybody but the owner; this may later be
changed by the @code{file_permissions_*} group of functions described later.
@end deffn

@deffn Function error_type file_permissions_delete_rule (u8 *@var{name}, acl_type @var{acl})
Deletes an ACL rule to the given file. Returns an error if this can't be done.
@end deffn

@deffn Function error_type file_permissions_add_rule (u8 *@var{name}, acl_type @var{acl})
Adds an ACL rule to the given file. Returns an error if this can't be done.
@end deffn

TODO: More ACL stuff, do error number stuff.

@node Section 2.3
@section The tornado library (library_tornado)

@node Section 2.4
@section The graphics library (library_graphics)

@node Section 2.5
@section The console I/O library (library_console)

@deffn Function void console_print (u8 *@var{string})
Prints @var{string} to the terminal owned by the program.
@end deffn

@deffn Function error_type console_print_formatted (u8 *@var{format_string}, ...)
Prints @var{format_string}, replacing the type identifiers given
with the parameters added to the function call. The syntax is identical to
the ordinary ISO C @code{printf} function.
@end deffn

@deffn Function error_type console_clear (void)
Clears the current console.
@end deffn

@deffn Function error_type console_cursor_move (int @var{x}, int @var{y})
Move the cursor to the given position.
@end deffn

@deffn Function error_type console_cursor_get_position (int *@var{x}, int *@var{y})
Get the current cursor position.
@end deffn

@deffn Function key_type console_key_wait (void)
Waits for a keypress and returns its keycode. The key codes are in standard
BIOS format. (????)
@end deffn

@deffn Function key_type console_key_check (void)
Checks if a keypress has been made. If so, the key code is returned.
Otherwise, KEY_ERROR is returned.
@end deffn

@node Section 2.6
@section The network library (library_network)

@deffn Function socket_type network_open (protocol_type @var{protocol}, void *@var{parameters})
Opens a network socket of type @var{protocol}. Some network protocols require
additional parameters; if so, those are passed in @var{parameters}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function error_type network_close (socket_type @var{socket})
Closes the socket associated with @var{socket}.
@end deffn

@node Section 2.7
@section The memory library (library_memory)

@deffn Function void *memory_allocate (dword size)
Allocates @var{size} bytes of contigous memory. If, for some very strange
reason, no memory can be allocated, returns NULL. Otherwise, returns a
pointer to the memory area.
@end deffn

@deffn Function error_type memory_deallocate (void *@var{block})
Deallocates the memory block given in @var{block}. If the memory can't be
deallocated, returns the error code ERROR_NO_MEMORY. Otherwise, returns
SUCCESS.
@end deffn

@node Appendix A
@section Access Control Limits

TODO: Write about this.

@node Chapter 3
@chapter Error numbers

@deffn Macro ERROR_NO_MEMORY
No memory available.  The system cannot allocate more virtual memory because
its capacity is full.
@end deffn

